Reviewer 1 Comments to the Author
 
This manuscript seeks to differentiate two possible expectations about the relationship between group size and personal network homophily, as expressed by religious affiliation partner similarities among a sample of students from Notre Dame. There are substantial theoretical, methodological, and interpretive limitations to the manuscript’s current approach.
Major Concerns
Theoretically – the “Minority Distinctiveness Theory” and proposed alternative “Majority Exclusiveness Theory” perspectives are presented as competing hypotheses. While that’s one possibility, there are others, which extant literature has spent a fair amount of time attempting to make sense of, and the manuscript does not presently engage. In particular, group size (number of people with a particular characteristic) and group proportion (their contribution to the overall population as a rate) have been shown to potentially be separable. This has led researchers to further differentiate that simply accounting for the relative contribution of a group to a population’s composition (proportion) isn’t sufficient to theorize the strength of homophily expected within or (comparably) across groups. For example, Goodreau et al (2009) demonstrated that for race/ethnicity, minority group’s “normalize” homophily was curvilinear – with the strongest effects when they’re a moderate sized group in a larger population. In other words, there’s no clear reason we should expect “MDT” or “MET” to consistently out-predict the other; instead there are contextual reasons they should differ – many of which have already been theorized elsewhere, and are simply not considered in this manuscript. With only one population being examined here, there’s no way to empirically differentiate these potential differences, so this is primarily a task for theoretical specificity, that’s currently lacking.
Methodologically – the manuscript accurately suggests the “need for researchers to be clear about how they measure and compare homophily rates” (p. 18), but unfortunately this manuscript suffers from failing to do so appropriately for the questions being examined. Fortunately, there is an excellent paper demonstrating the differences between how various measures of homophily differentially operationalize the conceptual-methodological mappings, which the authors would benefit from – Bojanowski & Corten 2014. The present approach of using the EI index (or its normalized form) uses a dyad-wise construction of homophily, while many of the interpretations in the paper suggest these differentiate individual-level “preferences” for (strength of) homophily. As presently analyzed, the paper potentially conflates individual-level differences in tendencies to form ties (whether sent or received, typically conceptualized in the literature as “activity” and “popularity” effects) that may differ by religious affiliation with homophily effects. You can think of homophily as an “interaction” (statistically), and by not having controls for in/out degree in the way the EI index is computed, you’re leaving out the “main effect” (see the paper above on a better alternative, or a more accurate interpretation of this one) – i.e., you haven’t sufficiently “randomized” the baseline differences to account for these individual-level differences before computing dyad-wise expectations. Furthermore, the regression approach layered on top of this here doesn’t accomplish this either, as it can’t account for these potential combinations appropriately without treating these as multi-level models (with separate individual and tie levels) – see Perry et al (2018).
Interpretation – there’s a substantial selection effect at play here that’s essentially ignored by the manuscript presently, namely that the non-Catholics in this sample have opted to attend a Catholic university. The manuscript’s proposed differentiations between opportunity structures (a la Feld’s notion of foci) and religion (here, mainly affiliation, but correspondingly could apply to other measures as well) focus solely on internal dynamics (e.g., activities at Notre Dame that have a specifically Catholic focus differentiated from those that don’t). While those may align with exclusiveness/distinctiveness claims, in a setting that’s universally (at least) nominally Catholic, the role of exclusion/distinction likely is quite different. There’s little reason to believe that the Catholic/non-Catholic differences observed at Notre Dame are likely to reflect those observed in a non-Catholic setting. This isn’t a critique (only) of the generalizability of this sample/finding, but is intended to point out that many of the theorized processes raised here may not operate in ways that are as consistent with the primary theoretical background literatures might suggest given that homogeneity (i.e., Catholics may not “exclude” non-Catholics here assuming others are unless they know otherwise, and the non-Catholics here may not be especially distinct from the Catholics culturally, given that they’ve all opted to attend a Catholic university). This needs to be addressed for carefully contextualized interpretation of any findings.
Minor Concerns
Not all non-individual (“choice”) homophily is “induced” homophily; there are also other forms (e.g., consolidation).
Lesser comments & Detail suggestions
Abstract: “Forming ties to similar others” (“to” is missing)
References
Bojanowski, Michał, and Rense Corten. 2014. “Measuring Segregation in Social Networks.” Social Networks 39(0):14–32.
Goodreau, Steven M., James A. Kitts, and Martina Morris. 2009. “Birds of a Feather or Friend of a Friend? Using Exponential Random Graph Models to Investigate Adolescent Social Networks.” Demography 46(1):103–25.
Perry, B. L., B. A. Pescosolido, and S. P. Borgatti. 2018. Egocentric Network Analysis: Foundations, Methods, and Models. Structural Analysis in the Social Sciences. Cambridge University Press.
 
Reviewer 2 Comments to the Author
 
The authors raise an interesting question about what drives religious mixing among students at a Catholic university. Despite being a straightforward question, this is a quite challenging question to answer. I applaud the authors for discussing measures that do and do not adjust for each group’s homophilous opportunity pool. This is an important distinction that is too often overlooked. Nonetheless, as I outline below, the data on hand is not capable of testing their hypotheses about whether Catholics or non-Catholics have stronger homophily.
Primary Issues
To begin, what is the theoretical construct that the authors wish to compare across religious groups? What is homophily? They use the word “preference” quite often, but that is not something that can be inferred from this data (more on this below). If not preference, then is it the pattern of mixing relative to chance (which the normalized EI index measures)? If so, link this to the theoretical constructs of interest. Specifically, how is “banding together” operationalized? What values of what measures would show that for non-Catholics? What would that look like for Catholics?
I question how the operation of Minority Distinctiveness Theory (MDT) works in the context of Notre Dame. The theory argues that an identity will be more salient when individuals are a numeric minority (i.e., Mehra et al. 1998). However, in the present study, the identity in question (religious identification) defines the focus that brought students together. There is reason to expect that Catholics were more likely to be drawn to Notre Dame because Catholic is a highly salient identity to them, whereas non-Catholics were drawn to the university despite its Catholic orientation. In other words, religion is reasonably more salient among Catholics than non-Catholics, irrespective of their group sizes. If so, then we would expect religion to be a more salient basis for tie formation for Catholics than non-Catholics. Do the authors have data on religious salience (i.e., religiosity, as opposed to religious identification)? This is an important mediator that would offer useful insight.
Despite competing expectations about which group has stronger homophily, I’m not convinced that this question can be answered with the author’s data. The logic is: Assume two groups with equal average degree. When ties are undirected, then it is a mathematical necessity that a numeric minority will have a greater average number of cross-group ties than the numeric majority. If there are fewer intergroup ties than expected by chance (i.e., inbreeding homophily), then both groups would have fewer intergroup ties than baseline and more ingroup ties than baseline. Using group-level, baseline-adjusted homophily measures, comparisons of the “strength” of homophily between the two groups will always show a difference between them, with a greater deviation from baseline for the smaller group. This mathematical necessity is true for the odds ratio, network models, and the normalized EI index (anything that takes the non-contact layer into account). Also, note that in this situation, examining group-specific homophily measures offers no insight into whether one group is driving inbreeding more than the other. Thus, it is impossible to say that one group has a stronger preference for homophily.
Now, relax the assumption that ties are mutual and allow random error in reporting, but the kind of relation is still one that involves reciprocity or mutuality (e.g., friendship, interaction, communication). In this scenario, we would expect that the numbers of cross-group ties are approximately equal for the two groups. In that case, the same property holds—when the number of ingroup ties exceeds the number of cross-group ties, smaller groups are expected to have a larger deviation from baseline than the numeric majority. Again, this is a mathematical necessity.
Given this is how baseline-adjusted homophily measures behave by default, using them to evaluate differences between groups of different sizes is problematic. Baseline-adjusted homophily measures have a mathematical property wherein smaller groups have a larger deviation from baseline than larger groups (e.g., a more negative normalized EI). As a result, such homophily measures should not be used to test the hypothesis that anything else mediates the association between group size and homophily estimate (at least not when examining one network). Namely, you can’t test the argument that “identity is more salient for numeric minorities and hence leads to more homophily” by comparing the homophily estimate of the smaller group with the larger group. The estimates for each group should differ whether or not the hypothesis is true.
In pursuing their research question, I would encourage the authors to explain the pattern of homophily estimates across religious groups that would (1) be evidence of MDT theory, (2) be evidence of MET, and (3) occur if there were no difference in homophily between Catholics and other groups (i.e., if ties were random). Then, explain the patterns of mixing that would be required to produce those homophily estimates. My sense is that for anything other than MDT to be supported, the network would need to display very different levels of degree across groups along with unusually low rates of reciprocity.
I have additional methodological concerns. First is that the analysis does not control for several alternative explanations for religious homophily. Chief among these is race/ethnicity, which is associated with religion and one of the strongest dimensions of homophily. Additionally, several network processes can amplify homophily, thereby inflating estimates (see Moody [2001] and Wimmer and Lewis [2010]). And, the university has several Catholic-based foci which would presumably draw Catholics and foster friendships (see Feld 1982). These do not necessarily need to be controlled for if one is only interested in describing the patterns of mixing. If that is the case, then claims should only be about patterns of mixing (not preference). In any case, their role should be discussed as alternative explanations to religion homophily preference.
Second, it is impossible to measure “preferences” based on network selections. There are many reasons people choose similar alters that have nothing to do with preference. There are confounds with race and foci as mentioned above. Even controlling for known confounds, there are potential unknown confounds that can affect selection behavior. Hence, homophily measures from observational data do not represent the theoretical notion of preferences. There are arguments that such data can offer insight to “revealed preferences” but measuring those would require data across multiple networks that vary in composition (see Currarini, Jackson and Pin 2010).
It might also be the case that members of different religious have equal homophily preferences, but the available pool of alters leads non-Catholics to go outside of their group. Blau discussed this as “multiform heterogeneity”. Preferences for similarity on gender or dormmate or classmate narrow down the number of same-religion opportunities. This is another factor complicating inferences about “preferences”.
Also related to the normalized index, I struggled to recreate the summaries presented. I’ll give the example of Catholics, but this applies to all groups. An EI ratio of -.622 equates to Catholics having ~81% ingroup ties and ~19% cross-group ties (i.e., (.19-.81)/(.19+.81)=-.62). Given the average degree of 5.9, this equates to ~ 4.8 ingroup ties and ~1.1 cross-group ties. Catholics have 269 ingroup opportunities and 91 cross-group opportunities. Using these values, I calculate the normalized EI as -.16. This is far different from the value of -.418 reported in the text.
My calculations are also different for the other groups. I estimated proportions of ingroup ties of .21, .15, and .24 for Protestants, Other, and None respectively. These proportions are all in excess of their proportion in the population, which means that the normalized EI index should be negative (indicating homophily). My estimates show normalized EI values of -.36, -.61, and -.48 (versus the positive normalized EI indexes in the paper). These discrepancies are more than I would have expected by rounding error. Some discrepancy can be expected due to the authors calculating these measures at the individual level, whereas my estimates are at the group level, but these differences are much greater than that would seemingly predict. Could the authors shed light on this? Could the authors present more descriptive information that would allow the reader to calculate the group level EI and normalized EI themselves? Specifically, the number (and proportion) of ingroup and cross-group ties that members of each group have.
Other Issues
The paper would benefit from providing a concrete definition of homophily. Specifically, what distinguishes homophily from not-homophily? The abstract uses the phrase “the tendency to have ties to similar others.” A person may have several ties to similar others, but a lot more ties to dissimilar others—is that person displaying homophily? My estimates are that non-Catholics have 1-2 ingroup ties on average. Is this evidence of homophily or banding together?
p. 7, What proportion of incoming students are represented in the data? What was the response rate?
How did the recruitment strategy (i.e., snowball at tier 2) potentially affect estimates of bias? Tier 1 ego biases would determine who is selected in tier 2, and may be associated with their ingroup biases.
p. 8, Might there be error in reports of alter religion? At a Catholic university, respondents who do not know a friend’s religion might assume that they are Catholic.
Say more about the normalized EI index. Can you discuss its theoretical range when presenting it on p. 10. I would help to provide an example to show its departure from the EI index for two groups—one with a higher proportion of ingroup ties, but at chance rates, and another with a higher proportion of ingroup ties in excess of chance rates. Also, I don’t see this measure in Everett and Borgatti (2012). Does this measure adjust for the impossibility of a tie to oneself?